[SOUND] Next, let's talk about
the concept of specificity.
Now specificity also has
a pretty simple rule, and
that is most specific
selector combination wins.
While this is a pretty
simple sounding rule,
I would say that forgetting about
the concept of specificity and
how its simple method in CSS is what
trips up developers most often.
Let me show you a pretty straightforward
technique that will let you figure out
which selector combinations
are most specific than others.
You can think of specificity of
your selectors as keeping a score.
The selectors with the highest score win.
In other words,
the selectors with the higher score
would be considered the most specific.
It's easier to calculate the score if you
arrange the types of things that affect
the score from left to right,
with the left being the highest
value of specificity.
Then simply take your CSS rule and
fill in the number of times you see
a particular type of selector being
used in it's proper location.
The number that's created
is your final score.
So let's take a look at our
four boxes on the screen.
The most specific targeting
that exists in CSS doesn't
actually use any selectors at all and
that is the style attribute on an element.
And that happens when you
define your CSS declarations
straight on the element
using the style attribute.
And that makes perfect sense, right, since
specifying the style attribute is like
pointing to an element with your
finger and saying, that one.
There's nothing more specific than that.
And that is why the style
attribute is the most left box.
Next is specificity value, comes the ID,
then the class or pseudo-class, and
then the number of elements that
are used in your selected combination.
So if we tale a look at this example,
which says h2 style equals color green
we see that we're using the style
attribute which means this box gets
a one and the rest of them get a zero.
And this is pretty much the highest
score a thousand that you can get.
Take a look at a different selector,
for example, div p and color green,
you see that it's not defined inside
of a style attribute so that gets a 0.
There's no ID selector so that gets a 0.
There's no class definition
selector either so that gets a 0.
But there's two elements,
here we're using a descendant
combination of selectors, div and p.
So, therefore, the number of
elements that we have is two.
That's why the last box gets the number 2.
So let's see how this would
work if you had to compare and
see which one of the selector
combinations would win.
So if you're targeting a particular
paragraph tag and in one case
you're targeting it with the set of
selectors that are shown on the left side
of the screen, and in another case
you're targeting it with a set of
selectors that are shown on the right
side of the screen, which one would win?
In other words,
the color of the text of that paragraph.
Would it be blue, or would it be green?
Well let's quickly calculate their scores.
The one on the left is not using the style
attribute, so you know that gets a 0.
It does use an idea attribute,
so that gets a 1.
There's no class So that's a 0, and
the number of elements is a 1,
so that gets a 1.
So the final score of the left is 101.
On the right, likewise we're not using
the style attribute so that gets a 0.
We're not using an ID attribute,
so that gets a 0 again.
We're using one class, so that gets a 1.
And we're using two elements so
that gets a 2.
So the score is, 101 versus 12.
So obviously the one on the left wins and
the text color of our paragraph
will be blue, not green.
Looking at the score on the left and
the selectors we've chosen to get that
score, we could see that we really could
have won this selector battle by not
specifying the div there to begin with.
We could have just expressed
it with an id selector and
still would have won this battle and
therefore the color of the text to that
paragraph would have still been blue.
So let's jump in to our code editor and
see this concept in action.
Okay, so here we're in sublime text,
and we're looking at specificity.html.
And this is a pretty simple document.
All it has is really one paragraph tag,
and
it's sitting inside of a header
tag with class navigation.
If you look at the styles
that are specified for
this document,
we have two competing styles.
One is trying to make the text color blue,
and
the other one is trying to
make the text color red.
Obviously, as you can see on
the right side in the browser,
the text color ends up being blue.
Why is that?
Well keeping in mind what we just learned,
the specificity rule
here is what's in play.
Both rules have one class so
that gets us a ten.
However, the first rule has two elements
specified and the other one only one.
So this gets a score of 12.
And this gets a score of 11.
So this rule wins.
There's one more concept
that I'd like to show you.
And that is a concept of overriding all
these rules taken all together with
the !important.
Here we have a third way to
define this paragraph tag.
And its color,
its text color, to be green.
And this time I'm going to define
it with the word !important.
An !important basically says,
it doesn't matter what the specificity is,
I want to override everything and make
this property they way I'm defining it.
So here, we define the color being green.
So if we refresh the browser, even
though this is a much less specific rule
then this one, this is just, gets a score
of 1, and this, remember, is a 12.
Since we specify important,
our color of the text will turn green.
Now, I want to warn you
about using this !important.
While very tempting to skip understanding
all these cascading rules and
specificity rules and just slap important
everywhere whenever things don't work out,
this will very quickly on a real world
project become a maintenance nightmare
where you'll be overriding one important
declaration with another important
declaration and you'll basically start
working out your own system where gigantic
mess will be your most important rule.
So avoid using important
unless you absolutely have to.
In summary, in this lecture we spoke
about the Cascading algorithm.
The origin, the origin precedents,
how the declarations merge as well
as inheritance and specificity.
The Cascading algorithm provides pretty
precise control over targeting content
while allowing you maximum reuse
of styles across your website, and
that is basically what makes CSS so
powerful.
Next, we're going to
talk about styling text.